hey everyone my name is net welcome to
my backyard and this time I'm gonna be
slicing up just big elm log my advanced
sawmill that I built right here in my
driveway a few years ago so if you
missed the video where I went out and
picked up this log
I'll leave you a link to that up in the
cards and down in the description this
was picked up out of a side yard it was
kind of a weird and awkward kind of
pickup but I went relatively smoothly
got this thing back here got it on the
mill and is pretty much ready to go well
kind of I have a little bit of prep work
to do on the log as well as kind of get
set up and get ready to be sawing here
so Before we jump into it let's walk
around log a little bit see where can't
get ourselves in to see what used to
happen before we get sawing and just
talk about the overall log itself so
first off overall size on this thing the
diameter down here cross is 45 inches
right through into this kind of boldest
area here and we're looking at about 38
inches here in the other direction so
kind of an oblong oval type of log
overall length is right at 10 feet but
there is this big chain saw cut right
here that we're gonna have to address so
just like a lot of logs that I get this
one was destined for firewood as well so
there is this chainsaw cut here which
goes pretty much all the way through
here and there is just a tiny little bit
material on the other side still holding
it on but you know like that much a
little strapped in there holding it on
there so that's not gonna work out so
well so that one's probably gonna get
cut off or well it is I already decided
that now on the other side we have a
similar type situation where there is a
partial chainsaw cut here this is
further down the log then the other one
is there's that one but at this
orientation that cut would be removed
after maybe the second slab or so so
that could be left there and we can keep
cutting all the way through or can be
removed and this could be sawing as
something separately that's a nice
little crotch area there which would be
pretty cool to see sawn as well so if we
take a look at the butt and the log we
can see this kind of fissure type thing
going all the way through here and go
all the way down through there as well
so that is a bar conclusion that runs
the entire width of the log vertically
there's letters separating this thing
into two halves so cutting it like this
you would have a bar conclusion between
two full slabs on your side so you have
Mehsud slabs or two very easily
separable slabs that we use for you know
two different tables or two different
projects or what have you so with that
in mind the fact that it's gonna be two
halves leave this attached it wouldn't
be all that bad either because on this
side you'd have a slightly longer slab
on this side and if they're used
separately as individual pieces that you
just have two different length boards
you can use or they could always be
joined back together to make one big
slab for a table top for instance so
thinking about the orientations thing is
laying in right now this is the way I'm
going to cut it but it could be sawn
nine degrees from here and then load
exposed all the crotch figure here as
well as a crotch figure on that side
since that side is pretty much all cut
away anyway is not a whole lot of
purpose in me doing that at least in my
opinion
and I think cutting it this way will
expose a little more interesting things
since we have this kind of burl thing
for you know kind of forming there we
had that bar conclusion which should
have a lot of figure around it as well
now the other thing with this decision
is the fact that base things play out so
far from each other so that would be a
big void if this was sawn all the way
through which could still be cool for
something but that's something to keep
in mind as well if this was still sawn
like this you would have this big hole
here between the two halves of the slab
so you know some more things to kind of
think about so as far as I can tell this
is an American elm as far as my kind of
research kind of showed me the American
elm has this kind of goofy base to it
where like one side is offset like that
or at least that's the way I've seen it
so if anyone knows for sure what kind of
elm tree this is feel free to let me
know but there is the leaf so I think
the first thing I want to do is just
finish up this cut separate this chunk
of the tree from the rest of it there I
won't they keep in mind is that the
trunk there is supporting this side of
the log so if I were to cut that off is
we probably roll
probably fall off the bed but it's gonna
go in the wrong direction because I
don't have a whole lot of space it's not
a whole lot of room here to get that saw
head past there without this thing
shifting all the way over which we could
do but I prefer none I have to worry
about that at all now I do want it to
roll a little bit I want to even out the
crotches a hair so I've put a board
underneath it there to catch it a little
bit as it starts to fall and that should
allow it to rotate a little bit but not
to rotate so much that it comes too far
off the side of the saw
[Music]
so because I can't really stand back
here behind there mostly because this
law is going to roll and I don't want to
be inside of a log while it's rolling so
I have to be standing out here which
means things gonna roll towards me it's
terrifying enough so I have this wedge
here which is gonna keep it from
pinching clothes in the front and kind
of jamming up my size I try and get out
of the way as it starts to move so
hopefully I'll work out okay I have a
small amount material left that here
it's only thing holding it on is from
here down to right about here it's just
a little strapped here but I have to cut
and yeah I can't get it from in here I
have to be on top of this log and don't
let me stay on top of the log well it
starts rolling with a chainsaw
so this is the more safer spot in theory
[Music]
oh boy so now this is off of here I can
show you what we're still connected so
basically just right through back here
which is where they couldn't reach with
their chainsaw wasn't quite long enough
so just right there so that would have
been a lot of slabs with you go cutting
it but looking at it now I'm gonna leave
that for sure because it's actually them
extend that far past there and it's this
have some cool burrows and stuff so I
think we're good now this is how it's
gonna be all right let's get a blade on
this thing that would probably be
somewhat helpful
so now as the saw head is going up one
last little thing that I forgot to the
show I've got some screws and stuff
hanging out over here so I'll probably
pull those out at some point there's a
fuel in there it's a big one right there
with a washer so should be some good
stuff inside the flock I should probably
take off this chain too that'll be
pretty splint to try and cut through
yeah I think I'm ready to make that
first cut the log should clear the
carriage so that's good and the current
saw height is at 37 inches off the bed
so I'm not super high which is a kind of
nice
[Music]
so I think what this has got all these
burrows on it I might cut this a few
more times later and we'll see what's
inside of there yeah that works
it's a other way and it's kind of in the
right area for when it's time of saw it
again
some good stuff in here I get the
feeling this is gonna be heavy
oh well good it got lighter so there is
the start of that bar conclusion so you
can see how it's been growing around
itself for all these years this will
expect all the way through the entire
log to separate halves of the larger
slab this is nice and light yes take a
look what's going on up here I got that
bar conclusion right there and you know
there's some fun interesting bits of
grain here so this first cuts kind of
small so what I really want to do is be
down more into this flat area to get
more width off these cuts so I think for
the first couple of cuts I'm just gonna
make a couple pieces that are a sixth
quarter so inch and a half thick that's
also gonna get me through all those
chainsaw cut here so that we can make
continuous length cuts that are a lot
wider than this currently is
[Music]
[Applause]
why does all the exciting stuff happen
when the cameras off so the only thing
holding this tree together was just it
was first couple of cuts so as I was
walking around getting ready to bring
the saw head back heard something
creaking and that bar conclusion was
starting to open up and let go okay it's
loosing some stress then it just goes
boof
so we got some little shorts six quarter
boards off of here so that's a start
the nice thing about this is that since
I have a flat cut on here already it's I
can keep these things nested together
still throughout the cuts all I have to
do now is just roll them over so that
the flat cut is not down on the bed so
that keeps the orientation the same
between all the cuts which is kind of
nice so this became a much bigger
adventure than it was before
[Music]
so I feel like I should be all something
like are you not entertained right now
so this took right at two hours to get
rolled over and repositioned not nearly
as bad as if I was gonna be it's a lot
of back and forth but that's how it goes
there is now a six o'clock I'm gonna go
in to have dinner and we'll get back to
cutting this up some other day all right
it is the next day sometime here this
afternoon to get back out here and keep
working on this log here now one thing I
can't forget to do is pull these screws
and things out here I'll probably do
that after a few cuts here so there's
less crap him away so it's pretty
incredible this crew is actually still
standing if there actually wasn't really
connected by much at all so this is all
that's pretty much all soil in there
holding all together so that's a pretty
incredible this tree was still standing
now I had figuring that these were gonna
calm part into two different slabs I
just didn't think they would come apart
while the log was still sitting there on
the saw but I guess this is how the the
weight of the log was laying there so
just kind of opened up by itself but
yeah alright makes for a more
interesting story yes is all soil
there's a little like a root or
something here uh we're gonna cut it
let's get the saw positioned I'm going
to try and I come in I don't know maybe
down in here somewhere and see where
that kind of ends up get it rid of get
rid of a lot of the waste stuff that's
gonna be up here there's not a whole lot
of width now the nice thing about the
fact this thing is rolled over onto a
flat is that I can now use the lumber
scale door with myself down to the bed
since now I'm everything off to the bed
and not the previous cut like I normally
have the other things nice about this
too is that there's a flat file in the
bottom there so these things are totally
stable I don't to worry about them
moving around on me as I'm cutting like
I normally would if I was just cutting
with the curse side of log touching the
bed so really in this case I could
remove slabs as I go I don't have to
keep the slabs in place in order to keep
weight on the log to keep it from moving
around
[Applause]
[Music]
so I am temporarily gonna stack these
over here because I've sold to like a
quarter of my entire inventory the last
couple months which left me with few of
these stacks that are partial so this
log and I log back there has a very sold
through over half of the slabs so I have
to consolidate so many stacks and then
one of these bases become the base for
this guy but for now temporarily Babel
go right here that's nice like the color
on this stuff it's got a nice light
brown heartwood so since we're on the
outside block still not a whole lot of
crazy things going on but doesn't give
us a nice preview of what we're gonna
get into the actual log
let's get these uh screws out of here
drywall screw
that's not good
this one just ripped out or broke can't
tell okay oh good one so there we go we
got a few large screws and a little tiny
drywall screw in there so uh yeah
they're out now let's keep on cutting
see what happens
[Applause]
all right we hit something towards the
end of this cut so let's start digging
let's see what we got
maybe I missed a screw or something
so have you got something that's a good
size I'm a blade or missing significant
my teeth especially right here there's
no tooth from this point all the way to
here so off a foot missing teeth there
nurse is pretty good so hunt through it
pretty quickly which is always good
you were teeth destroyed if you go
through the inclusion at normal speed
and said trying to slow down because he
knows me metal there yeah there's a
couple in this one these were deep in
here fully embedded was this there that
was he got mangled so there is where
this was not exactly sure and this thing
is kind of goofy it's all like little
pieces
take a guess on that one
all right now yeah something that was
fairly mangled by the saw blade whatever
it is pretty big though all rights get
these slabs out in here and take a look
at them
splits brush here we go we got a little
rot pocket and going on up there one
thing I like about
Elmas is the color it's really beautiful
it's not super dark it's not super light
it's got a nice kind of hue to it cool
this is a yeah
it's kind of gross let's get the next
one
get an idea of how wide right here down
here about 40 inches I think up here
we're gonna be like a 48 ish or so 48 50
inches and then for the length I think
we're pretty close to 8 feet 7 foot 7 so
this size piece of wood things are
looking pretty interesting and stuff
I like the straight green kind of clean
lines look here but we have again the
stressed area in the middle and as we
get further rivers should start seeing
some kind of swirling green things going
on around this bar conclusion as the
wood gets a little bit of weird around
that area also apparently there was
something on this half as well that we
cut through and then there's the other
two on this side which we have
previously seen all right let's get this
blade off of here get a fresh one on
there and get back to making some
sawdust
[Music]
[Applause]
so I think it's becoming pretty evident
why this tree was kind of declining this
is all ant tracks so probably had a good
amount of rot as you can see it through
here and some ant colony is living in
here so it's probably been about a thing
has just got so rotten so gross that
started to die very nice clean looking
green though so you can see all these
ant tracks ant colony lines all through
here so this has been critters living in
it
hollowing it up from the inside both
limbs it looks like - so that was
probably what I would did it seeing a
little bit of the kind of Elm eyes in
here that's sort of like kind of real
figure oh I guess we did hit some more
stuff I didn't notice a few more nails
or something in here one two let's take
a look at this one
well found our friends the ants giving
us some pretty straight green stuff now
it's probably getting close to quarter
sawn at least out here is quarter sawn
so that's nice and straight yeah big ol
hole in there there's our friends the
ants I'll take care of them in a second
we're starting to get some crotch figure
on top of this limb here since we're
sawing this instead of sawing it this
way we're sawing it straight through
that's gonna remove a lot of the crotch
figure but it's gonna give us figure on
top of the crotch area which we'll see
more of this going through over here
starting into those burly
areas so we got those there which is
pretty darn cool
since it's been kind of cold out these
ants have been a kind of dormant are
getting ready to go dormant so they got
some kind of rude awakening for me today
so we're gonna take care of these guys
with some this household ant killer this
is gonna work out pretty well because I
have to go in for the day I can leave
this exposed like this I can check on it
again tomorrow before I do hit it and
I'll head over to the slabs on the sauce
hill and see if there's any ants over
there as well mister probably are a
whole yeah there are so I'm gonna spray
these guys and then what's nice is I can
come and check on it again tomorrow when
I wake up it's a lot of them in there
night night ants I'll see you tomorrow
so it's a little colder now we are now
into heavy frost season so everything is
now frozen so these guys probably frozen
so lovely that insecticide does a pretty
good job of killing all the ants in
these things and then I just come back
with the compressed air and blow it all
the caverns since it's below freezing
now and any answer so each hair gonna be
dormant let's keep an eye on these slabs
as we get into the spring class I see
ants crawling around gonna know they're
still in there I think it's pretty safe
to say that this tree had some serious
insect decay which is probably why it
was dying okay
we're getting that time of year where
the sadhus just freeze it to the surface
guys say he's in hot water can and you
can see the extent of all those ants and
how much damage they caused in this tree
right through here which makes a pretty
interesting look now but there's also
some cool little figuring here on top of
this crotch here so this is what you're
going to get affray means like
perpendicular to the crotch not parallel
so with this cut orientation we're
parallel to this main crotch right here
but we're perpendicular to the two
crotches that were up top there so I
guess I was seeing some of this type of
figure here as opposed to those long
feathers which you would see to her saw
parallel to the crotch down here all
quarter-sawn really nice color really
nice straight grade I had a look at some
of that top side crotch figure we're
gonna have the bullseye attempt effect
with the feather going in this direction
as opposed to in that direction so looks
like we have three more custom-make to
separate what's on the milling to be
four remaining slabs or I guess since it
is separate the eight remaining slabs
will time to get back to song for a
little while
we're going to pause here and take a
look at a couple slabs I heard something
happen over here so I probably cut
through a nail or halfway through that
cut and I gotta move my side stops
anyway so let's move some slabs and see
what we got
see what's going on here that's nice
it's really nice especially without ant
damage in there again we've got some
really nice straight link yeah straight
green clear stuff down here and both
sides we get into the ant damage up here
which is a really cool look we're
getting up with some figure from the
crotch on this side here's that partial
chainsaw cut just looking really nice
let's grab the next one splish-splash
there we go
oh that's beautiful I think this one
might be my favorite one I like this
pair a lot because you have some really
nice like pretty much all 100% clear
green through most of the slabs then you
have a really interesting cavity here in
the middle yeah I think that's my
favorite best shape by far I'll walk
them back over here where's that male
there's a little man right there which
went through please be kind of just fine
though
after that so I'm gonna keep going this
play is already cut through I think that
makes it three nails now it seems to be
cutting okay it's a little slow this was
probably dull but it's not really waving
around her not cutting flat so keep on
going
[Applause]
[Music]
okay so through my own lack of
observation skills I did not notice that
there was a 2x4 under this guy so that's
going to have thrown things off quite a
bit but I don't know doesn't seem
noticeable this is in theory all of
these cuts aren't perfectly like next to
each other well I think you can really
tell that you know this end here is
higher up in the log than there it seems
to kind of flow over just fine even
these separations are still fine so I
don't think it's gonna matter a whole
lot other than that last slab on the
right side here is going to be tapered
and pretty much fire would things be
pretty similar to the last one that I
liked the same kind of thing there's
some pretty clear stuff this has a
little more Cathedral grain since we're
getting away from the quarter sawn area
this also has a little more grain going
on here but we still have pretty clear
material with a pretty cool little whole
thing in the middle and whatever is
going on here whew this is too much fun
oh that's cool
I'm really liking this now we're getting
some more of the sapwood so we have this
really cool to like half staff wood half
Hart would kind of look so I'll kind of
swirl it together there was nice Reds in
there as well
and over here we got some kind of
straight green stuff surprise the price
alright now for this guy I cannot
believe I missed that okay so this is
figure I want to do with this because it
is not a consistent thickness it's not
going to drive very well it's gonna
drive very unevenly so I have one end
that's about two and a half inches thick
I have the other end that's about one
inch thick but look this is towards the
outside of the log so it's not all that
important anyway
it's getting towards the narrower spots
so if this happened and I was making
those cuts the middle of the log where
there's a higher value that would be a
little more of an issue this isn't too
much of a problem though since this log
already produced a few or several kind
of short boards and odd boards I have
those who deal with two so what I could
do here is cut this into shorter
sections and then it would be too much
of an issue so this right here that's
enough for a guitar body since there was
an ask me Oh guitar bodies so I can cut
this guy right here this would become a
guitar body and then this area down here
could just be sawn again or cut the
smaller pieces or whatever for smaller
projects it's not a complete loss but
now this slab is doing separate from
that one over there which isn't a big
problem either because there's so many
little pieces that I already got off
this log and also looking at this guy
I mean it's cut almost all the way
through here so this could be some more
shorts and things like I have got those
slabs over there
it's four from there and I have these
short pieces and the small narrow pieces
there as well so I have a lot of little
stuff to deal with with the slog already
as well as these little off cuts if I
want to keep cutting these as well so
things just going to go in a separate
pile with all the smaller stuff so
another nice stack of slabs I'm really
happy that this worked out this way with
the to kind of separate necess last
because I am almost out of that style of
slab so this Willick and of restock the
nested slab inventory I have a few more
slabs I gotta come out of here
still and I'll get these things stacked
but I'm not a huge rush to be out here
freezing and stacking wood but I'll get
around to it eventually so I hope you
enjoyed this one it's always a nice
change of pace when things don't work
out perfectly makes things a little more
interesting and that's what I'm in it
for the the interest in the adventure so
thank you as always for watching I
greatly appreciate through the questions
or comments on the sawmill anything back
in the shop anything out here please
feel free to leave me a comment as
always to be happy I should be questions
you might have and until next time have
to order cake